
My name is Jared Spool and I am a professional opinion giver. I work for two companies, actually. I work for a company called UIE and a school called Center Centre.

UIE is a research company where we study what it takes to produce really great products. We like to say we are mapping out the world of great product design.

Center Centre is a bricks and mortar school in Chattanooga, Tennessee, where we are creating industry ready user experience designers.

Design as a team sport in that, eh, the designer in the room is not the only designer, usually. Everyone thinks they're a designer. And that's because in almost all cases, they are. But often times they're just not a very good designer, but that's because they don't have the education and practice that makes someone a good designer.

But the reality is none of us really learn design in any formal way, even those of us that went to school. If you asked people, most of the design they learned they learned after they left school, and started actually doing it.

So we all just learned to do design by having someone show us how to do it and then practicing it. And the role of the designers, the official designers in the room, really is to help bring the other designers out and make them better designers.

I would first suggest that you pay attention to the fact that there are people who know a lot of things, but just because they don't know design doesn't mean that they're, they don't know how to actually make good experiences for people. But they not necessarily know the tricks of the trade.

So, a great designer, ah, in the government experience is one who is working with all the people who understand the problem and helping come to solutions that really (pause) move things forward in a great way. And so they're really a facilitator more than they are a putting pixels on the screen designer.

(laughs) Which is worse? Well I don't think either is worse. I think they're just, just different states. It's sorta like saying is water better when it's sitting still, or when it's boiling.

A designer that is unconsciously incompetent is just someone who thinks they are very good at what they do, and um, doesn't know how bad they actually are. Whereas someone who is unconsciously competent, eh is actually very good at what they do, and doesn't know how to relate to the people who aren't very good at what they do. So, so each has their pros and cons.

Well the first thing you have to do to make something delightful is, eh, remove all the frustration. And much of the frustration comes from the fact that you are probably missing some basic expectation that somebody has.

A basic expectation is something that they, they come expecting from the design. So for example, a basic expectation is that, (pause) that when you look up instructions to do something, the instructions will actually tell you how to do it.

And, in many government systems they either don't tell you how to do it, or they tell you in a way you can't understand it. And that's very frustrating. So the idea is the remove all that frustration. And (pause) you remove all that. And that'll ghet you to a point where it's no longer frustrating. And no longer frustrating is not delightful. TYhe way you would focus on making something delightful is, is to first make it not intimidating - plain language, helpful. Making sure the right information is there. Not asking for things that don't make sense to ask for. Letting the computer dso things its good at.

But then start to remove steps. Am I telling the government the same thing over and over again. Or can I possibly (pause) do, take advantage of the things that computers are good at - like storing information anf remembering things and actually using those things over and over again.

And so having that constancy and focusing on eliminating extra steps makes something delightful.

(Thoughtful pause) I'd probably be living with my parents. (laughs) It's a good thing I just keep doing what I'm doing.

We have a website, UIE.COM, which we built in 2003 and one of these we'll actually go back and (pause) update. So please don't judge me.

So UIE.COM has all these videos and webinars and we have these conferences that we hold. And for the school, thats CENTERCENTRE.COM, and that contains a tremendous amount of information about how you train designers, and how you make industry ready designers.

FINISH

(Telephone rings off camera)

Eh, can you get that please? It's eh, I thinks it's the President of the United States calling.
